README.md, before:

# Distinction Maximization Loss (DisMax)

## Efficiently Improving Classification Accuracy, Uncertainty Estimation, and Out-of-Distribution Detection Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating

>>**We keep single network inference efficiency. No hyperparameter tuning. We need to train only once. SOTA.**

Building robust deterministic deep neural networks is still a challenge. On the one hand, some approaches improve out-of-distribution detection at the cost of reducing classification accuracy in some situations. On the other hand, some methods simultaneously increase classification accuracy, out-of-distribution detection, and uncertainty estimation but reduce inference efficiency in addition to requiring training the same model many times to tune hyperparameters. In this paper, we propose training deterministic deep neural networks using our DisMax loss, which works as a drop-in replacement for the commonly used SoftMax loss (i.e., the combination of the linear output layer, the SoftMax activation, and the cross-entropy loss). Starting from IsoMax+ loss, we created novel logits that are based on the distance to all prototypes rather than just the one associated with the correct class. We also propose a novel way to augment images to construct what we call fractional probability regularization. Moreover, we propose a new score to perform out-of-distribution detection and a fast way to calibrate the network after training. Our experiments show that DisMax usually outperforms all current approaches simultaneously in classification accuracy, uncertainty estimation, inference efficiency, and out-of-distribution detection, avoiding hyperparameter tuning and repetitive model training.

>>**Read the full paper: [Distinction Maximization Loss: Efficiently Improving Classification Accuracy, Uncertainty Estimation, and Out-of-Distribution Detection Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05874).**

>>**Visit also the repository of our previous work: [Entropic Out-of-Distribution Detection](https://github.com/dlmacedo/entropic-out-of-distribution-detection).**

 <img align="center" src="assets/results.png" width="750">

___

# Use DisMax in your project!!!

## Replace the SoftMax loss with the DisMax loss changing few lines of code!

### Replace the model classifier last layer with the DisMax loss first part:

```python
class Model(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
    (...)
    #self.classifier = nn.Linear(num_features, num_classes)
    self.classifier = losses.DisMaxLossFirstPart(num_features, num_classes)
```

### Replace the criterion by the DisMax loss second part:

```python
model = Model()
#criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
criterion = losses.DisMaxLossSecondPart(model.classifier)
```

### Preprocess before forwarding in the training loop:

```python
# In the training loop, add the line of code below for preprocessing before forwarding.
inputs, targets = criterion.preprocess(inputs, targets) 
(...)
# The code below is preexistent. Just keep the following lines unchanged!
outputs = model(inputs)
loss = criterion(outputs, targets)
```

## Detect during inference:

```python
# Return the score values during inference.
scores = model.classifier.scores(outputs) 
```

## Run the example:

```
python example.py
```

___

# Code

## Software requirements

Much code reused from [deep_Mahalanobis_detector](https://github.com/pokaxpoka/deep_Mahalanobis_detector), [odin-pytorch](https://github.com/facebookresearch/odin), and [entropic-out-of-distribution-detection](https://github.com/dlmacedo/entropic-out-of-distribution-detection).

### Please, install all package requirments runing the command bellow:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Preparing the data

### Please, move to the `data` directory and run all the prepare data bash scripts:

```bash
# Download and prepare out-of-distrbution data for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets.
./prepare-cifar.sh
```

## Reproducing the experiments

### Train and evaluate the classification, uncertainty estimation, and out-of-distribution detection performances:

```bash
./run_cifar100_densenetbc100.sh*
./run_cifar100_resnet34.sh*
./run_cifar100_wideresnet2810.sh*
./run_cifar10_densenetbc100.sh*
./run_cifar10_resnet34.sh*
./run_cifar10_wideresnet2810.sh*
```

## Analizing the results

### Print the experiment results:

```bash
./analize.sh
```

# Citation

Please, cite our papers if you use our loss in your works:

```bibtex
@article{macedo2022distinction,
      title={Distinction Maximization Loss: Efficiently Improving Classification Accuracy, Uncertainty Estimation, and Out-of-Distribution Detection Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating}, 
      author={David Macêdo and Cleber Zanchettin and Teresa Ludermir},
      year={2022},
      eprint={2205.05874},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG}
}
```

Commit message:

Adding support to TinyImageNet, ImageNet, and the timm lib.

README.md, after:

# Distinction Maximization Loss (DisMax)

## Efficiently Improving Uncertainty Estimation and Out-of-Distribution Detection by Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating

>>**We keep single network inference efficiency. No hyperparameter tuning. We need to train only once. SOTA.**

Building robust deterministic neural networks remains a challenge. On the one hand, some approaches improve out-of-distribution detection at the cost of reducing classification accuracy in some situations. On the other hand, some methods simultaneously increase classification accuracy, uncertainty estimation, and out-of-distribution detection at the expense of reducing the inference efficiency. In this paper, we propose training deterministic neural networks using our DisMax loss, which works as a drop-in replacement for the usual SoftMax loss (i.e., the combination of the linear output layer, the SoftMax activation, and the cross-entropy loss). Starting from the IsoMax+ loss, we create each logit based on the distances to all prototypes, rather than just the one associated with the correct class. We also introduce a mechanism to combine images to construct what we call fractional probability regularization. Moreover, we present a fast way to calibrate the network after training. Finally, we propose a composite score to perform out-of-distribution detection. Our experiments show that DisMax usually outperforms current approaches simultaneously in classification accuracy, uncertainty estimation, and out-of-distribution detection while maintaining deterministic neural network inference efficiency. The code to reproduce the results is available.

>>**Read the full paper: [Distinction Maximization Loss: Efficiently Improving Uncertainty Estimation and Out-of-Distribution Detection by Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05874).**

>>**Visit also the repository of our previous work: [Entropic Out-of-Distribution Detection](https://github.com/dlmacedo/entropic-out-of-distribution-detection).**

>> ## **Train on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet.**

<img align="center" src="assets/results.png" width="750">

___

# Use DisMax in your project!!!

## Replace the SoftMax loss with the DisMax loss changing few lines of code!

### Replace the model classifier last layer with the DisMax loss first part:

```python
class Model(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
    (...)
    #self.classifier = nn.Linear(num_features, num_classes)
    self.classifier = losses.DisMaxLossFirstPart(num_features, num_classes)
```

### Replace the criterion by the DisMax loss second part:

```python
model = Model()
#criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
criterion = losses.DisMaxLossSecondPart(model.classifier)
```

### Preprocess before forwarding in the training loop:

```python
# In the training loop, add the line of code below for preprocessing before forwarding.
inputs, targets = criterion.preprocess(inputs, targets) 
(...)
# The code below is preexistent. Just keep the following lines unchanged!
outputs = model(inputs)
loss = criterion(outputs, targets)
```

## Detect during inference:

```python
# Return the score values during inference.
scores = model.classifier.scores(outputs) 
```

## Run the example:

```
python example.py
```

___

# Code

## Software requirements

Much code reused from [deep_Mahalanobis_detector](https://github.com/pokaxpoka/deep_Mahalanobis_detector), [odin-pytorch](https://github.com/facebookresearch/odin), and [entropic-out-of-distribution-detection](https://github.com/dlmacedo/entropic-out-of-distribution-detection).

### Please, install all package requirments runing the command bellow:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Preparing the data

### Please, move to the `data` directory and run all the prepare data bash scripts:

```bash
# Download and prepare out-of-distrbution data for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets.
./prepare_cifar.sh
# Download and prepare out-of-distrbution data for TinyImageNet and ImageNet.
./prepare_imagenet.sh
```

## Reproducing the experiments

### Train and evaluate the classification, uncertainty estimation, and out-of-distribution detection performances:

```bash
./run_cifar100_densenetbc100.sh*
./run_cifar100_resnet34.sh*
./run_cifar100_wideresnet2810.sh*
./run_cifar10_densenetbc100.sh*
./run_cifar10_resnet34.sh*
./run_cifar10_wideresnet2810.sh*
./run_tinyimagenet_densenetbc100.sh*
./run_tinyimagenet_resnet34.sh*
./run_tinyimagenet_wideresnet2810.sh*
./run_imagenet1k_resnet18.sh*
```

## Analizing the results

### Print the experiment results:

```bash
./analize.sh
```

# Citation

Please, cite our papers if you use our loss in your works:

```bibtex
@article{macedo2022distinction,
      title={Distinction Maximization Loss: Efficiently Improving Uncertainty Estimation, and Out-of-Distribution Detection by Simply Replacing the Loss and Calibrating}, 
      author={David Macêdo and Cleber Zanchettin and Teresa Ludermir},
      year={2022},
      eprint={2205.05874},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG}
}
```
